# Configuration files

NOTE: Parts of the description haven't yet been implemented for version 0.16.

All (or almost all) PATKIT configuration should be stored with the data. This
is a philosophical choice that stems from the fact that even GUI settings (such
as which frequencies are shown on a spectrogram and with which color map)
potentially affect analysis results. The idea is that standardising analysis
and annotation settings across a project or research group should be easy. If
you find that the current way PATKIT attempts to do this, does not work for
you, please get in touch and we'll see how things can be improved.

There are some very simple ways of circumventing this system and PATKIT will
not try to prevent that. However, things might not work quite as intended if
the assumptions about where files are stored are broken. Please refer to [Data
Management](DataManagement.markdown) for how PATKIT assumes recorded/imported
data is separated from PATKIT/derived/saved data and configuration files.

At time of releasing v0.16.0, there is an example of configuration files in the
GitHub repository in the `scenarios` folder and an example of a simulation
configuration file in `example_configs/ultrafest2024`. 

TODO: 0.20 Make full examples of data and configuration of various complexity.

## Default settings and user preferences

PATKIT does contain default parameter files and you can save your own preferred
settings which PATKIT will place in the `~/.patkit` (on Linux/macOS) or
`%userprofile%\.patkit` (on Windows) folder. However, when PATKIT uses given
settings with data, it will store those settings with the data. This means that
default settings and user preferences get copied to the data directories as
needed.

## Command history

By default, the command history of the interactive commandline is stored with
the global (user specific) configuration in the `.patkit` folder inside the
`history` file. It is plain text and of the same format as the `.python_history`
file. In fact, with a bit of tweaking a user could use `.python_history` instead
because the PATKIT interactive interpreter is actually just a Python interpreter
with PATKIT data preloaded. However, this is only recommended if you know what
you are doing.

## Configuration files

PATKIT has a number of configuration files. Briefly they are 

- `patkit_data.yaml` which defines how data should be processed, which metrics,
  statistics (in the PATKIT-specific sense of an aggregate statistic such as
  mean image of an ultrasound recording), and annotation should be generated.
- `patkit_gui.yaml` configures the PATKIT annotator GUI. It specifies what data
  is displayed and how. Essentially these are the settings that should be
  standardised for different annotators working on the same project or dataset.
- `patkit-publish.yaml` specifies graphs, exported data and other outputs
  that are intended for publication.  
- `patkit-simulation.yaml` specifies simulated data and analysis of that data.
- `patkit-manifest.yaml` is autogenerated by PATKIT. It is a list of Scenarios
  that refer to recorded data and stored with the recorded data. This file can
  be added to by humans if a Scenario gets copied from one computer or user to
  another. This will require some care but will save a lot of time if the
  PATKIT data in question requires a lot of computation to generate.
- `session-config.yaml` specifies the data sources in a session and the path
  structure, that is where to find files of different types. 
- `spline-config.yaml` tells PATKIT - under `import_config` - how to import a
  given set of splines and - under `data_config` how to trim the splines before analysis.

Below you can find what is intended to be a comprehensive list of configuration
fields available in the different config files. 

### `patkit_data.yaml`

These are set globally so that they may be omitted locally. They can be
overridden locally though and should be when, for example, different parts of
the data have been recorded in areas with different mains frequencies. 

```yaml
# What precision is treated as equal when comparing annotation boundaries.
epsilon: 0.00001

# Used in filtering sound signals before beep detection.
mains_frequency: 50
```

Path to recorded data. This should be relative to the ´patkit_data.yaml` file. 

```yaml
recorded_data_path: "../../recorded_data/tongue_data_1_1"
```

Various flags are gathered in one group. 

- `detect_beep` specifies if PATKIT should attempt to detect a 1 kiloHertz beep
at the beginning of recordings. 
- If `test` is set to `True` PATKIT will process only first 10 recordings. This
  is handy when testing out settings.

```yaml
flags:
  detect_beep: True # Should onset beep detection be run?
  test: False # Run on only the first 10 recordings.
```

Aggregate images can be generated with different metrics from ultrasound
images. Default is to generate the image from raw data, but this can be
overridden. 

Also by default the images will be preloaded - that is they will be generated
when PATKIT is started rather than when a recording is opened in the annotator. 

Finally, it is generally a good idea to release data memory. This means that
ultrasound videos are not kept in the computers memory after a recording has
been processed unless that recording is being displayed. Only set this option
to `False` if you know that you have very very much RAM at your disposal. This
option repeats in many other contexts below.

```yaml
aggregate_image_arguments:
  metrics:
    - 'mean'
  run_on_interpolated_data: False
  preload: True
  release_data_memory: True
```

Pixel difference can be generated with many different norms and these can be
specified in parallel. Same is true of timesteps used in the calculations.
`mask_images` is used to optionally mask either top or bottom of the image from
analysis. If `pd_on_interpolated_data` is `True` then PD will be calculated on
the interpolated, human readable fanned images. See above what preload and releasing data memory do. 

```yaml
pd_arguments:
  'norms':
    - 'l1'
    - 'l2'
  'timesteps':
    - 1
  mask_images: False
  pd_on_interpolated_data: False
  preload: True
  release_data_memory: True
```

Spline metric arguments are very similar to PD arguments in syntax and meaning
except they specify the metrics calculated on tongue splines, so the choice of
metrics includes now `annd` for Average Nearest Neighbour Distance, `mpbpd` for
Median Point-by-Point Distance, `modified_curvature` for the Modified Curvature Index, and `fourier` for the Fourier coefficients.

```yaml
spline_metric_arguments:
 'metrics':
   - 'annd'
   - 'mpbpd'
   - 'modified_curvature'
   - 'fourier'
 'timesteps':
   - 3
 'release_data_memory': False
 'preload': True
```

TODO 0.20: Verify that all these work. Especially the exclusion list.

Distance matrices are used for evaluating ultrasound probe alignment. They have
their own exclusion list (give it as a relative path) and metrics (currently
only `mean_squared_error`). 

`slice_max_step` simulates rotating the probe by slicing incrementally so that
the sector is always the same size. This parameter determines how many steps of
size one to take. `slice_max_step` is exclusive with `slice_step_to` which
generates a pair of maximally distant sectors for each step size ranging from
one to `slice_step_to`.

Setting `sort` to `True` sorts the recordings by their prompts. Additionally
setting `sort_criteria` will match the prompts in the order given and then sort
alphabetically in each match group. Non-matching recordings will be added to a last
group which also will be sorted within group.

`preload` and  `release_data_memory` work as above.

```yaml
distance_matrix_arguments:
 exclusion_list: "alignment/data/patkit_exclusion_list.yaml"
 metrics:
   - 'mean_squared_error'
 preload: True
 release_data_memory: False
#  slice_max_step: 6
 slice_step_to: 6
 sort: True
 sort_criteria:
   - 'i'
   - 'o'
```


### `patkit_gui.yaml`

Most of these parameters deal with data display.

#### General parameters for axes in the main plot

Height ratio of data display area vs textgrid tier display area. This does not
control directly the height of individual data displays nor individual tier
displays, but instead controls the ratio between the sum of data displays vs sum
of tier displays.

```yaml
data_and_tier_height_ratios: 
  data: 2
  tier: 1
```

Shared configuration for data axes and tier axes.

```yaml
general_axes_params:
  data_axes:
    sharex: True
    auto_ylim: True
  tier_axes:
    sharex: True
```

#### Axes definitions for the main plot

```yaml
data_axes:
  PD l1:
    modalities:
      - PD l1 on RawUltrasound
#    modality_names:
#      - l1
    sharex: True
    auto_ylim: True
  PD l2:
    modalities:
      - PD l2 on RawUltrasound
#    modality_names:
#      - l2
    sharex: True
    ylim:
      - 100
      - 2000
  PD normalised:
    modalities:
      - PD l1 on RawUltrasound
      - PD l2 on RawUltrasound
    modality_names:
      - l1
      - l2
    sharex: True
    normalisation: both # none, peak, bottom, both
  spectrogram2:
    sharex: True
  wav:
    sharex: True
  # density:
  #   sharex: False
```

#### TextGrid display parameters

```yaml
# Tiers drawn on the data axes. Ignored if the tiers are not found in the TextGrid.  
pervasive_tiers:
  - Segment
  - Segments
  - segment
  - segments
  - phoneme
```

#### x (time) axis parameters

You can either set the limits or set `auto_xlim` to True which means that the
whole recording will be displayed. This is implemented as a greedy 'all' in
case some modalities extend further in time than others.

```yaml
# Initial limits for x-axis
#xlim:
#  - -.25
#  - 1.5
auto_xlim: True
```

#### General display style parameters

```yaml
# Font parameters
default_font_size: 10
```

Dark vs light mode. Accepted values are `dark`, `follow_system`, and `light`.

```yaml
color_scheme: dark
```


### `patkit-publish.yaml`

This file will be documented in a later release.

TODO 1.0: Document this.


### `patkit-simulation.yaml`

Simulations are run on mock up tongue splines/contours extracted manually from
Peter Ladefoged's Vowels and Consonants. A commented version of the
configuration walked through below can be found on PATKIT's GitHub repository
in the `example_configs` folder.

The first parameters define where to save the resulting plots, if existing
files should be overwritten, and what message prefix should be used in logging
messages. If the `overwrite_plots` parameter is omitted, overwriting will be
confirmed individually for each existing plot file.

```yaml
output_directory: "ultrafest2024/"
overwrite_plots: True
logging_notice_base: "Ultrafest 2024 simulation: "
```

Sound/contour selection is defined with IPA characters:

```yaml
sounds: 
  - 'æ'
  - 'i'
```

This parameter defines the used point-wise perturbations in millimeters.

```yaml 
perturbations: 
  - -2 
  - -1 
  - -.5 
  - .5 
  - 1 
  - 2
```

This parameter group defines the spline distance metric simulation.

```yaml
contour_distance:
  metric: "annd"
  timestep: 1
  sound_pair_params:
    sounds:
      - 'æ'
      - 'i'
    perturbed:
      - 'second'
      - 'first'
    combinations: full_cartesian # also accepted: only_cross, only_self
```

This (rather simple) parameter group defines the spline shape metric simulation.

```yaml
spline_shape_params:
  metric: 'mci'
```

And finally the result figures are defined with the following parameter groups.
To omit a figure from the final plotting just comment out or delete the group
from the configuration file.

```yaml
# This produces a plot with change in the distance metric plotted
# as a ray on the perturbed point of the contour.
distance_metric_ray_plot:
  figure_size:
    - 10.1
    - 4.72
  scale: 200
  color_threshold:
    - .1
    - -.1

# Same as distance_metric_ray_plot but for shape metrics.
shape_metric_ray_plot:
  figure_size:
    - 7
    - 3.35
  scale: 20
  color_threshold:
    - 2
    - .5

# Two panel plot that demonstrates how the perturbations are applied.
# See the Ultrafest 2024 extended abstract for an example.
demonstration_contour_plot:
  filename: "demonstration_contour_plot.pdf"
  figure_size:
    - 6.4
    - 4.8
  sounds:
    - 'æ'
    - 'i'
```


###  `patkit-manifest.yaml`

These files are generated by PATKIT and may occasionally need to be amended by
users when Scenarios and Exercises get moved around between users and
computers. The file format is shown below. 

Paths should be given as relative to the manifest file. That way if the subtree containing the recorded *and* the PATKIT data gets moved, the links do not break.

```yaml
Scenarios:
  ../../derived_data/tongue_data_1_1
  ../../derived_data/tongue_data_1_1_exclusions
  ../../derived_data/tongue_data_1_1_splines
Exercises:
  ../../exercises/tongue_data_1_1_Pertti
  ../../exercises/tongue_data_1_1_Phoebe_Phonetician
  ../../exercises/tongue_data_1_1_Participant_1
```

###  `session-config.yaml`

TODO 0.27: Update the below description.

Until the data structure update in v0.19.0 only one data source is allowed.
Accepted names will be `AAA`, `RASL`, `EVA` (once flow data reading is
included), and `WAV` for plain audio recordings with possible accompanying
TextGrids.

```yaml
# This tells SATKIT which metadata importer to use.
data_source_name: AAA
```

Paths detail where different types of data can be found.

```yaml
# Paths to data, metadata and instructions.
paths:
  # This is where we read the data and metadata from. Leave the data type
  # specific directories empty if everything is in one directory. Dataset's
  # root directory is determined at run time .
  wav:
  textgrid: 
  ultrasound:

  # Where to find the spline import data. This is assumed to be relative to data
  # path.
  spline_config: spline_config.yaml
```

Spline config specifies spline format (these can vary quite a lot) and gives
additional instructions on how to trim splines (which spline points are
unreliable) before processing.


###  `spline-config.yaml`

TODO 0.20: This will be updated in the next configuration update.

```yaml
import_config:
  # Single spline file for all recordings (True) or one for each recording
  # (False).
  single_spline_file: True

  # Only one of the following will be in use.
  # If a single spline file, what is it called.
  spline_file: File003_splines.csv
  # If not a single spline, what glob pattern should be used to find the splines.
  # E.g. '*.csv'
  spline_file_extension: '_splines.csv'

  # Do the files have a header row?
  # Please note that possible header row information is ignored.
  headers: True

  # What delimiter does the file use. If left empty, this defaults to a tabulator.
  delimiter:

  # Either 'polar' or 'Cartesian' 
  coordinates: polar

  # Are the coordinates interleaved in 
  #  interleaved format (True): point1/x point1/y point2/x point2/y
  #  or non-interleaved (False): point1/x point2/x ... point1/y point2/y
  interleaved_coords: False

  # These are listed in order of appearance in the file. 
  # Please note that possible header row information is ignored.
  # Accepted values:
    # - ignore: marks a column to be ignored, unlike the others below, 
    #   can be used several times
    # - id: used to identify the speaker, 
    #   often contained in a csv field called 'family name'
    # - given names: appended to 'id' if not marked 'ignore'
    # - date and time: dat3 and time of recording
    # - prompt: prompt of recording, used to identify the recording with 'id'
    # - annotation label: optional field containing annotation information
    # - time in recording: timestamp of the frame this spline belongs to
    # - number of spline points: number of sample points in the spline used 
    #   to parse the coordinates and possible confidence information
  meta_columns:
    - id
    - date and time
    - time in recording
    - prompt
    - number of spline points

  # These will be either interleaved or not as specified by 'interleaved coords'.
  # Confidence values are always assumed to be non-interleaved.
  # Accepted values: 'r' with 'phi', 'x' with 'y', and 'confidence'
  data_columns:
    - r
    - phi
    - confidence
```

Finally, `ignore_points` specifies how many points should be trimmed from the
front and how many from the back of the spline (in this order). To trim no
points, give the value 0.

```yaml
data_config:
  # How many points should be ignored at the front and at the end of a spline.
  # All of the data is always read in, This setting is used in plotting and
  # processing the splines. Defaults to 0 at front and 0 at back if not specified:
  # ignore_points:
  #   - 0
  #   - 0
  ignore_points:
  - 11
  - 0
```
